GSoC'26 blog post - DuckDB backend for Martin (#811)
maplibre/maplibre.github.io: src/content/news/2026-08-15-gsoc-martin-duckdb/index.mdx

---
title: "GSoC'26: DuckDB Backend for Martin TileServer"
date: "2026-08-15"
categories: ["community-post"]
authors: [manbhav-sugla]
draft: false
description: "How I added DuckDB and GeoParquet tile serving to Martin during Google Summer of Code 2026."
---

import { Image } from "astro:assets";
import architecture from "./Martin-Architecture.png";

## Introduction and Motivation

> Hi everyone, I have been working on DuckDB support for [Martin](https://github.com/maplibre/martin) as part of Google Summer of Code, under the mentorship of [Frank Elsinga](https://github.com/CommanderStorm). Martin already serves vector tiles from PostGIS and from pre-generated archives such as PMTiles and MBTiles. This project adds a path for serving tiles directly from analytical datasets like GeoParquet directly via DuckDB.

Reviewer: Let's also mention cog and geojson

```suggestion
Hi everyone, I have been working on DuckDB support for [Martin](https://github.com/maplibre/martin) as part of Google Summer of Code, under the mentorship of [Frank Elsinga](https://github.com/CommanderStorm).
Martin already serves vector tiles from PostGIS, from pre-generated archives such as PMTiles and MBTilles, can extract images from COG and convert geojson to vector tiles on the fly.
This project adds a path for serving tiles directly from analytical datasets like GeoParquet directly via DuckDB.
```

The motivation for this is that many geospatial workflows already use DuckDB and GeoParquet for storage and analysis. Until now, putting that same data on a map generally required importing it into PostGIS, generating a separate tile archive, or maintaining a proxy layer. DuckDB's spatial extension now provides `ST_AsMVT` and `ST_AsMVTGeom`, making it possible for Martin to generate vector tiles from those datasets directly. Track the progress on this feature here - [#2264](https://github.com/maplibre/martin/issues/2264).

<figure>
  <Image
    src={architecture}
    alt="Martin architecture: configuration and map clients flow through the source resolver, tile catalog, and HTTP tile service. DuckDB sources sit alongside PostGIS and PMTiles/MBTiles, using a connection pool and the spatial extension to read GeoParquet and DuckDB files."
    style="max-width: 520px; width: 85%; height: auto; display: block; margin: 0 auto;"
  />
  <figcaption class="figure-caption">
    How DuckDB-backed sources fit into Martin.
  </figcaption>

> </figure>

Reviewer: The diagram is missing cog+geoson, but that is fine

This matters because DuckDB parallelizes a single query internally. A tile query can use several worker threads for Parquet scans, spatial filtering, and MVT encoding, with the limit controlled by `Config::threads`. Martin may also have multiple pooled connections, so the effective level of parallelism is approximately `pool_size × threads`. The default pool size is four.

Integrating this with Tokio required one additional boundary. `duckdb-rs` is synchronous, whereas Martin's tile interface is asynchronous. Connection checkout must remain non-blocking, and executing `ST_AsMVT` must not occupy a Tokio worker thread. `deadpool` provides asynchronous checkout and the actual DuckDB call is moved to Tokio's blocking pool:

```rust
pub async fn generate_tile<T, F>(&self, f: F) -> DuckDBResult<T> {
    let mut conn = self.pool.get().await?;
    tokio::task::spawn_blocking(move || f(&mut conn)).await?
}
```

> 

Reviewer: I don't think this adds value/understanding. Should be stuff that everyone understands without too.

```suggestion
```
